Dance Leads the Way as Art Meets Sport at the Cultural Olympiad. A program of arts events shown in conjunction with the 2024 Olympic and Paralympic Games looks at the relationship between art and sport. In dance and in sports, there is a common ritual: warming up. As much an art as an activity, it energizes not just the body, but also the mind, speaking less to effort than to surrender. What does it take to get into the zone, that place where the body and mind show up as equals? Since 2022 France has been warming up — on a grand scale. Culture, along with sport and education, is a pillar of Olympism, and France has taken that seriously with its Cultural Olympiad, a program of multidisciplinary arts events directed by Dominique Hervieu, a choreographer, an experienced leader in the arts and a former dancer as well. The thread running through this Olympiad is the connection between sports and art. When do they find symbiosis? When do they diverge? As Hervieu sees it, what binds the Olympic Games is culture, and there, the dance values she embraces play a role: “It’s a way to think with your body,” she said in an interview in Paris. “To think about society, to think about individuality, to think about space.” In other words, to be aware of yourself in the larger world. The contemporary mandate for including a cultural component with the Games began in 1992 in Barcelona, Hervieu said. But how to integrate it is a choice made by the host city, and Hervieu decided on the sports-art connection. There are obvious similarities between the two — the idea of excellence and surpassing oneself — but Hervieu also wanted to “show that art is not sport and vice versa,” she said. “The dimension of physical performance, which is the goal of sport with a view to winning, is not the goal of art. This difference is fundamental, because virtuosity in art is always a means of creating a space for meaning or poetry.” Programming has been robust and will continue throughout the games, although managing it all has been a challenge. “It has been very, very difficult,” Hervieu said. “At the beginning, I didn’t know how many people would apply. We have 2,500 projects, and it’s incredible. It could have been only 500. And everybody would be happy with 500. Me too! But I think it’s because of this spirit of the Olympic Games.” Throughout her career, Hervieu has emphasized two areas of the arts that are important to her: creation and democratization. This isn’t surprising given that she was previously the artistic director of the Lyon Dance Biennial, where planning the popular défilé, or dance parade, was one of her favorite jobs — a way to spread the gospel of dance. Because of her background — and the obvious connections between dance and sport — the Olympiad’s dance programming is particularly plentiful. “Even when I was a dancer, I spent 25 percent of my time with children, with older people, also, to have this kind of transmission,” she said. “I think it’s necessary with dance and with all arts for the Cultural Olympiad” to be accessible to a broad audience. Hervieu engaged the hip-hop choreographer Mourad Merzouki to create an official dance of the games, or la danse des jeux, a simple, participatory work featuring images — or winks, as Merzouki called them — from sporting events like boxing and archery. “The aim was to make a dance that youth, old people, people with disabilities — everybody — could participate in,” Merzouki said in a video interview. “It’s reflecting the image of the Olympics, something that people can share.” (During the games, it will be part of the festivities at Club France in the Grande Halle de la Villette.) Dance played a part in an Olympic torch relay earlier this month when the Paris Opera Ballet stars Dorothée Gilbert and Hugo Marchand appeared alongside 35 dancers performing an excerpt from “Swan Lake” at the Place de la Bastille. Hervieu was especially happy about the student component — more than 200 dancers, diverse in every way — from local schools, taking a ballet barre there. “Only 12 were from the ballet,” she said, referring to the Paris Opera. “The others were dance students and very mixed.” For applicants to be considered for the Cultural Olympiad, their projects had to have a link with sports, they had to be artist-led, and they needed an audience component. They couldn’t just, in other words, wallow in the land of process. “It could be small,” Hervieu said. “And we had small projects — very funny, very dedicated.” She cited an exhibition in Marseille exploring the athleticism of animals. “They don’t get an award or a medal,” she said. “It’s very simple. But at the end you learn many things.” The dance performances I saw as part of the Cultural Olympiad — a drop in the bucket, in light of the immensity of the programming — in varying ways highlighted the intelligence of the body while showing how dance must embrace spontaneity to push aside the self-conscious self. This was the case, most profoundly, at the Panthéon in “Möbius Morphosis” by the French-Algerian choreographer Rachid Ouramdane who harnessed the physical prowess of acrobats from Compagnie XY, the innocence of young singers from the Choir School of Radio France and the lithe, luminous dancers of the Lyon Opera Ballet. The cast members flowed through the air like flocks of birds — running, flipping, flying, as they gradually transformed, their sheer power giving way to a more poetic and almost unnerving display of vulnerability. It was, Hervieu said, an instance of Olympic values — friendship, generosity — being transformed into art. Saïdo Lehlouh’s “Apaches,” featuring dancers from the Paris Opera Ballet and from the world of hip-hop and beyond, was an exploration of Hervieu’s other aim: democratization. Here, just as important as who was onstage was the stage itself, the Palais Garnier, the home of classical dance in Paris. In just an hour, Lehlouh dismantled notions of aesthetic hierarchy by putting street dance on an equal footing with ballet. He made it clear that there are no winners or losers in dance. Breaking is a new sport at the Olympics this year; in one week of Cultural Olympiad programming just before the games began, Hervieu intriguingly showed different aspects of the art form — including “Apaches”; “Hip-Hop 360 Show”; and a staged battle between B-boys and B-girls at the Olympia theater. “All these things are the world of breaking,” Hervieu said. “I think there is no danger in France that people are focused only on breaking as sport. This diversity is really why France is rich.” In the battle at the Olympia presented by RStyle, the organization of the hip-hop pioneer François Gautret, four illustrators from the Angoulême International Comics Festival drew the performers in real time to create, essentially, a live comic strip that was projected over the stage. But the real jubilance came from the dancers, notably Campanita, the victorious B-girl who danced with force and fire but also understood that the spirit of a battle isn’t competition but generosity. “The sport part is where athletes are showing they are the best,” Gautret said. “It’s all the competition spirit. But in culture we are talking more about exchanges, sharing with people.” What wins in a dance work? Imagination and individuality. RStyle — the “R” refers to Riquet, in the 19th Arrondissement, where Gautret grew up dancing — also presented his more extravagant production, the cinematic, three-part “Hip-Hop 360 Show” at the Théâtre du Châtelet. It looked at hip-hop’s 50-year history and featured three choreographers, including Lehlouh, whose starkly poetic section was a dreamlike rendering of the body as a retainer of emotion. Now, with the games in full swing, programming continues outdoors: There are performances at the Parc des Champions, where Olympic athletes will be celebrated, and a block party hosted by RStyle. On alternate days, there will be a vogue ball by Vinii Revlon as well as a performance by Merzouki featuring breakers, stilt-walkers and BMX. And there is also a mini-spectacle of classical and electro dance for 40 performers by the celebrated choreographer Angelin Preljocaj. “It’s a kind of défilé,” Preljocaj said, “It’s like walking on the street and dancing, which is completely different than being onstage. In this case, the dramaturgy is completely pushing out. It’s a completely different art in terms of the sensation of the dancer.” It’s a homage to the Olympic Games and to the joy of moving — no matter if it’s dance or sport. “I deeply believe in the wellness of the sport on the body and on the mind,” Preljocaj said. “I know if you move your body, if you invest with your body, your brain also grows. It gives you a kind of sweetness and joy.” ‘We’re All Living the Olympics Through TikTok Now’ In NBC’s quest to provide wall-to-wall coverage of the Paris Games, the TV network has aimed to dominate a different device: your phone. Some of the best fencers in the world were competing on Sunday night at the Grand Palais, a 124-year-old exhibition hall with soaring arches that had been repurposed by organizers to serve as one of the most spectacular venues at the Paris Olympics. The setting was so inspiring that Chris Matthews, a basketball trainer with more than three million followers on Instagram, and Jeenie Kwon, a fellow content creator with more than 10 million followers on her Jeenie Weenie YouTube account, wanted to get in on the action. Behind a bank of bleachers, as several Olympic volunteers studied them with — how to put this? — great curiosity, Matthews and Kwon pretended to sword fight while a friend filmed them. Matthews soon whipped out his iPhone to film himself. “So, I just got to fencing,” he said. “Wow!” As part of its effort to engage with a younger audience, NBC Universal has recruited a small army of online content creators to work with the network in Paris. The creators’ mission? Film themselves visiting venues, chatting with athletes, cheering at events and otherwise enjoying the grandeur of the Games, all with an exhaustingly theatrical joie de vivre. “One of the most amazing things about the Olympics is that we, in some ways, use it as a little laboratory,” said Geo Karapetyan, the senior vice president for platform partnerships at NBC Universal. “And we’re very fortunate to have forward-thinking senior executives who have allowed people to try new things.” Enter NBC Universal’s Paris Creator Collective, which, at 29 members, is larger than the athlete contingents from countries like Botswana, Estonia and Singapore. “We’re all just hard-working individuals,” said Molly Carlson, a Canadian cliff diver and mental health advocate — and former competitive diver — whose online fans refer to themselves as the BraveGang. “And we’re like, ‘Oh, we can be part of a team, too!’ It’s like our own mini Olympics.” On Sunday morning, Karapetyan met with Carlson and a few other members of the team — the first of three waves of creators that will cycle through Paris over the course of the Olympics — in the lobby of an upscale hotel in the 16th arrondissement. He provided a rundown of the day ahead: a trip to NBC Universal’s studios at Musée de l’Homme, where the creators would have a chance to meet with la Phryge, an anthropomorphized red hat who has emerged as the surprisingly lovable mascot for the Games, before they scattered to various events that night. Matthews and Kwon, for example, would be off to fencing, where medals would be awarded. (The group gasped in near unison at the prospect.) Lecrae, a rapper and actor whose given name is Lecrae Moore, had been assigned to an evening at swimming, where Léon Marchand, a 22-year-old Frenchman, seemed poised to win his first medal. (“Ohhh!”) Carlson was bound for women’s gymnastics. (“So fun!”) Kristy Scott, a fashion and lifestyle influencer who, along with her husband, Desmond, has more than four million subscribers on YouTube, was headed to beach volleyball. Desmond Scott had not made the trip. “We’ve been traveling so much, he was like, ‘You know what? You got this one,’” Kristy Scott said. “But now that I’m here, I’ve been sending him videos — I went to swimming last night, and he loves swimming. He was like, ‘I should’ve gone with you.’” The creators are celebrities in their own hand-held, dopamine-filled world, each with millions of followers on various social media platforms. (NBC is working with Meta, Snapchat, TikTok, YouTube and Overtime on the project.) But they still seemed awe-struck when Michael Phelps, the decorated Olympic swimmer, discreetly strolled through the lobby in a baseball cap and sunglasses. The Olympics are a new experience for most of them, and their goal is simple: act as surrogates for those at home who cannot experience the excitement for themselves. “So many fans are telling me, ‘I can’t wait to follow your TikToks and live it through you,’” Carlson said. “We’re all living the Olympics through TikTok now.” Here, in the flesh, was one particularly peppy corner of the internet sprung to life, a group of Gen Z-ers who would fail doping tests for rocket-fueled, prelunch enthusiasm even if they were at the D.M.V. The collection of them in one place felt, in a way, like the influencer version of a blockbuster superhero crossover, if only one of the “Avengers”— Jeenie Weenie in this case — had chosen to accessorize with a stuffed puppy handbag instead of a battle-ax. NBC is leaning into this new era. Savannah Sellers, a morning anchor on the network’s streaming news channel, is hosting a nightly show on TikTok called “Spotlight on Paris,” which broadcasts live from the Team U.S.A. House. “This is still an NBC sports property, and this is still an NBC Olympics property,” Sellers said. “But let’s jazz it up a little bit and bring it to a new generation.” As for the creators, some of their usual powers are limited in Paris. Because their social media posts reach a global audience and because they are here on behalf of NBC, which has the broadcast rights for only the United States, the creators are restricted from filming any of the actual competitions. That means no break dancing, no canoeing and no fencing — unless, of course, they pretend to do it themselves. They have embraced the challenge. “It’s fun because we have to use our personalities,” Carlson said. Last week, before the start of the Games, Tom Carles and Alex Durand, native Parisians and an inventive tag-team duo with an account on Instagram called AT Frenchies, posted up in an empty set of bleachers at the beach volleyball venue. Teams were practicing, which meant that Carles and Durand had to wait — and wait some more — for the court to clear out before they were able to capture their content. The result — a beautiful panoramic video of the venue in the shadow of the Eiffel Tower, complete with their spellbound expressions — has been viewed more than 20 million times. “This might be the biggest opportunity we’ve had,” Carles said. During their tour of NBC’s studios on Sunday, the creators posed for selfies — so many selfies — on the network’s prime-time set. Later, they were lured away from a 360-degree “Glam Cam” to mingle with la Phryge, whom the Paris Olympic organizing committee had dispatched for a meet-and-greet. “Helloooo!” Carlson said as she approached la Phryge. “Can I hug you? Ahhhh, so cute!” As they embraced, Carlson got a surprise: She discovered that an inflation system was buzzing inside the mascot’s costume. “Oh, my God! You’re, like, vibrating!” Carlson said. “So fun. I love the look. High-five.” They high-fived. Matthews stood nearby, waiting for his turn. He was kicking himself for forgetting to bring a basketball. “I could’ve acted like I was teaching him to shoot,” Matthews said. “Imagine if we had a rim and I could do a shooting video!” Before the Olympics, Kwon got a test run of sorts when NBC sent her to the U.S. Olympic swimming trials in Indianapolis. The experience was both exhilarating and overwhelming, she said. So much content. So little time. “I almost had a heart attack,” she said. So, for the Olympics, she brought her two-person production team with her to Paris. On Sunday, Kwon was sending them video clips from fencing. After Yannick Borel of France scored the first touch against Mohamed El-Sayed of Egypt in a men’s épée individual semifinal, Kwon covered her mouth with glee. She turned her iPhone camera on herself to capture the moment as the crowd around her began to chant the Frenchman’s name: “Yann-ick! Yann-ick!” “That’s awesome,” she said as she reviewed her footage. “I’ve got to use that for sure.”